# quantwork
A repository dedicated to simple programming tasks relevant for me in computational finance. In short:

  1) The folder 'black_scholes' contains several Python files relating to pricing in the Black-Scholes model like pricing the European and digital call options by A) numerically solving pricing PDE, B) training a 2-layer neural network to learn the pricing formula from training data, and C) Monte Carlo estimation of the risk-neutral valuation formula. Additionally, there is a script to recover the volatility from the option price.
  2) The folder 'misc_scripts' contains several Python and C++ files which implements a dice game, heat equation solver, Monte Carlo estimation of Gaussian moments as well as $\pi$ (with and without parallel programmering)
  3) The folder 'notes' contains some mathematical framework and model specification used in the pricing methods for Black-Scholes. 

# black_scholes
  1) bs_pricing_from_heat_equation.py contains an extended heat equation solver compared to heat_equation_solver.py, which can handle other boundaries than 0. In particular, we implement the ideas in black_scholes_pricing_from_heat_equation.pdf and numerically solve the pricing PDEs stemming from the European and digital call options. We place the grid such that $\log(K)$ is the center grid point for both options. The file contains a test case of $S_0 = 200$, $K = 220$, $T = 1$, $r = 5$ and $\sigma = 0.5$. The option price is plotted against the stock price on the grid. The deviation for both types of options at $T$ compared to the theoretical closed form pricing formulas are less than $0.002$ with the closed form price being $35.925$ and $0.349$ for European and digital, respectively.
  2) bs_pricing_from_neural_network.py contains a Neural Network approximation of the pricing formula for a European call option. In particular, the model (2 layers both of width 64) is trained a large number of labeled points to minimize the $L^2$-distance between some test prices and the predicted prices from the model. The 95% percentile yields roughly 1.5 in deviation. Finally we look at Shap values and recover the financial intuitive relationships: Decreasing strike $K$, increasing volatility $\sigma$ and increasing stock price $S_0$ all increase the price of the option in the model. A possible improvement might be to switch to a 4-parameter version where we consider $\log(S_0/K)$ instead of $S_0$ and $K$.  
  3) bs_pricing_from_monte_carlo.py uses Monte Carlo estimation and anti-thetic variates to simulate the average risk-neutral price of the digital and european call options. Runs quite fast.
  4) implied_volatility.py implement both the bisection method and Newton's method to numerically solve which value of $\sigma$ yields a certain price in the Black-Scholes formula. Newton's method relies on vega and often converges faster, but test cases in the file illustrates that for very small initial guesses on $\sigma$ or large strike prices $K$ (which makes vega closes to 0), then Newton's method doesn't work. On the other hand, the bisection is slower, but much more robust.
  5) master_pricing_comparison.py imports the modules from bs_pricing_from_heat_equation.py, bs_pricing_from_neural_network.py and bs_pricing_from_monte_carlo.py to compare the prices alongside the closed formula from a user input of stock price, strike price, maturity, rate and volatility. Initially training the neural network is the bottleneck in running time. From testing, it seems solve the pricing PDE performs best, closely followed by monte carlo estimation, and then the neural network performs somewhat worse. 

# misc_scripts
  1) pi_estimation.cpp which implements a simple Monte Carlo estimation of $\pi$ in C++ using uniform samples from a 2x2 square and computing the fraction that land inside the unit circle. With uniform samples, the acceptance rate is pi/4 = 78.5%, but an idea to improve this is using importance sampling and switching to, e.g., $2 \cdot \beta(2,2)$-distribution so generally points are closer to the center.
  2) parallel_pi_estimation.cpp improves the Monte Carlo simulation of $\pi$ in 4) by using multiple threads. On my pc, using all 20 threads available, the program goes from running $n=10^8$ samples in 20.3 seconds to 2.2 seconds, so roughly an improvement by a factor of 10.
  3) heat_equation_solver.py which implements a finite difference method for solving the heat equation with a boundary condition in dimensions 1 and 2. The method can be extended to higher dimension, but since the number of grid points grows exponentially in the dimension, it is not possible to apply this method in practice. Instead use Feynmann-Kac to and simulate the expectation using Monte Carlo, where the precision does not depend on the dimension.
  4) dice_game.py which implements an optimal strategy for stopping a dice game where you roll a six-sided die for a fixed number of rounds. The goal is maximizing the expected number of pips. Uses recursion. 
  5) gaussian_moments.py which simulates the standard Gaussian $m^{th}$ moment using Monte Carlo. The files contains 5 different version: A) Simple Monte Carlo, B) Importance Sampling from variance $m+1$, C) Importance Sampling from variance $m+1$ and antithetic variables, D) Importance sampling using $\Gamma(\tfrac{m+1}{2},2)$-distribution and antithetic variables, E) Mixture of two Gaussian at $\pm \sqrt{m}$ and antithetic variables. The best performing version is D, where essentially the variance is 0 of the estimator.

# notes
 1) black_scholes_pricing_from_heat_equation.pdf contains a short derivation from the Black-Scholes partial differential equation to a heat equation, and how the solution of this equation can be used to price the original option. Emphasis is placed on the European call option $\Phi(S_T)=(S_T-K,0)^+$ and digital call option $\Phi(S_T)=\mathbf{1}(S_T>K)$.
 2) black_scholes_pricing_from_neural_network.pdf contains the precise mathematical description of the Neural Network used in black_scholes_pricing_from_neural_network.py.
